\section{Placement}

The placement of the I/O routers in a large 3D torus can have an enormous impact
on the traffic patterns and congestion characteristics present in the system.
This is important for maximizing I/O performance as well as minimizing the
interaction between application communication and I/O. Building on the lessons
learned from OLCF's Spider~I implementation of fine-grained routing in 2008, an
improved method for placing LNET routers on Titan was developed and implemented
for Spider~II.

\begin{figure*}[t]
  \begin{center}
    \includegraphics{figures/jaguarplacement}
    \caption{Jaguar Layout}\label{fig:jaglayout}
  \end{center}
\end{figure*}

\subsection{Topological Concerns}
\label{sec:topo}

The router placement layout used for Spider~I was designed to distribute the
routers topologically through the machine while also minimizing the number of
cabinets that contained routers (see Figure \ref{fig:jaglayout}). This resulted
in a very regular I/O pattern that was prone to congestion if I/O traffic was
not properly kept localized.

Details about Gemini's architecture and design are available in other
literature \cite{hoti}.  Additional details and performance characteristics are
available in a paper titled ``Understanding the Impact of Interconnect Failures
on System Operation'' \cite{interconnect} presented at CUG 2013.  Jaguar's
upgrade from Cray's SeaStar interconnect to Gemini significantly changed the
network's characteristics.  Each Gemini supports two nodes, which effectively
halved the Y-dimension length.  Additionally, Y-dimension connections are
comprised of only half the links of X- and Z-dimension connections.  Thus, I/O
traffic should be limited in the Y-dimension due to its reduced relative
bandwidth.  This suggests that routing zones should be ``flattened'' into
``rectangular prisms'' instead of the more traditional cubic zones.

Since Gemini uses dimension-ordered-routing, I/O tends to converge to a single
path as it nears the destination.  Thus, it is important to avoid putting
routers in the same plane.  This can help avoid congestion, but many-to-one
communication patterns in a 3D torus will always suffer from some amount of
congestion.

Minimizing the hop count between clients and routers is essential for providing
high-bandwidth communications with the storage servers.  While Gemini routing
arbitration is locally fair, it is globally unfair.  Packet age and hop-count
are not taken into account when the router selects the next packet to forward.
Figure \ref{fig:geombw} shows an example of this issue.

\begin{figure}[h]
  \centering
  \input{figures/geombw}
  \caption{Geometric Bandwidth Reductions}\label{fig:geombw}
\end{figure}

Node 0 can be considered an I/O router while the others are acting as clients
attempting to send data to the router.  When only node 1 is communicating, it
is able to achieve 100\% of the bandwidth across the link.  Once node 2 starts
communicating, the router attached to node 1 accepts half the bandwidth from
node 1 and half from node 2.  Effectively, the bandwidth is shared between the
nodes.  When node 3 begins communicating, the router attached to node 2 fairly
arbitrates traffic between nodes 2 and 3.  Since that router only has half of
the global bandwidth, nodes 2 and 3 each only get one quarter of the total
bandwidth to the router.  When node 4 begins communicating, the problem becomes
even more obvious.  The router attached to node 3 fairly arbitrates traffic
between nodes 3 and 4, but it can only grant one eighth of the total bandwidth
to each.

As these chains get longer and longer, the bandwidth available to the ``last''
node can become abysmal.

\subsection{Physical Constraints}


The following physical constraints and goals were kept in mind while
determining an optimal placement algorithm:

\begin{description}
  \item[Topological Concerns] \hfill \\
    Routers must be placed to optimize for the topological concerns mentioned
    in Section \ref{sec:topo}.
  \item[Minimize Cabinet Count] \hfill \\
    Each cabinet that contains a router module requires a hole to be drilled in
    the floor to accommodate the cables.
  \item[Cable Length] \hfill \\
    Shorter cables are cheaper and easier to manage in the data center.
  \item[Partitionability] \hfill \\
    Occasionally, Titan's 3D torus must be partitioned to facilitate extended
    maintenance activities or testing.  During this situation, it is important to
    ensure full routability to boot from both ``ends'' of the machine.  A boot
    node is located in physical columns 0 and 24 (topological columns 0 and 13).
    Thus, routers should be located in a way that minimizes the number of
    columns required to access the entire file system.
\end{description}

\subsection{Placement Choices}

The challenge is to choose the optimal placement for the 432 I/O routers. In
the Cray~XK architecture, each service module contains four service nodes.
Since each service module displaces a compute module, it is important to
utilize each node.  Ideally, the LNET routers would exist on the same module as
less bandwidth-intensive nodes (such as a login nodes) to dedicate more
bandwidth to routing.  This is unfortunately impossible due to the sheer number
of routers required to achieve sufficient bandwidth.

Spider~II has 36 InfiniBand switches that are named based on row and position:
\textit{atlas-ibsw\{1-4\}\{a-i\}}.  Titan's 432 I/O routers are divided equally
among the switches, with each switch providing 12 connections to Titan.
Titan's routers are named based on the switch to which they connect and their
index: \textit{rtr\{1-4\}\{a-i\}-\{1-12\}}.

Having 4 routers on a module corresponds nicely with the 4 rows of Spider~II.
The  four nodes on a given module will connect to the same ``letter'' switch in
each of the 4 rows of Spider~II.  Initially, this was designed such that nodes
0, 1, 2, and 3 connected to rows 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively.  Before
deployment, OLCF staff realized that this connection might be suboptimal.
Router 0 and 1 share a Gemini, so in the typical use case of a job writing to a
single file system, contention may be present on the links leading to that
Gemini.  The placement was modified so nodes 0 and 2 connect to rows 1 and 2
while nodes 1 and 3 connect to rows 3 and 4.  This ``swizzle'' is designed to
spread the load for a single file system to two different Gemini chips within a
module.

OLCF staff wrote several \textit{Perl} scripts to generate and analyze the
placement for the I/O routers.  First, the machine was broken up into 4
sections of two rows each.  The intention here was to limit hops in the
Y-direction due to its limited bandwidth.  The 12 modules for a given group
were assigned to the sections, three per section.  The starting position for
the first router was manually determined to aid in satisfying physical
constraints.  The subsequent routers in the subgroup were placed approximately
$\frac{1}{3}$ around the X- and Z-dimensions.  When two modules for different
groups are placed in the same cabinet, they are offset by 12 in the Z-dimension
($\frac{1}{2}$ of the way).  Between sections, the starting X- and Z-dimensions
are offset.  By modifying the starting positions and parameters, several
iterations were created and evaluated before arriving at a final configuration.
The final placement map is shown in Figure~\ref{fig:titanlayout}.

\begin{figure*}[t]
  \begin{center}
    \includegraphics{figures/titanplacement}
    \caption{Titan Layout}\label{fig:titanlayout}
  \end{center}
\end{figure*}


% vim:textwidth=80:
